---
layout: post
title:  An ode to uv
categories: [Python, Tutorials, uv]
pinned: true
---
After using uv for a couple months, it continues to impress. It's fast. It's easy to use. I have not completely abandoned Poetry because my existing projects are already configered to use Poetry, and my colleagues have not yet adopted uv. Nonetheless, uv still offers tremendous advantages in my workflow. This post will explain how I make use of uv in my workflows and its advnatages over other tools, when my projects are still configured for Poetry.

- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Advanced settings for linux servers](#advanced-settings-for-linux-servers)
- [Python Management](#python-management)
- [Environment management](#environment-management)
- [Package Installation](#package-installation)
- [System-wide tool management](#system-wide-tool-management)
  - [Tools with python dependencies](#tools-with-python-dependencies)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Further reading](#further-reading)


# Installation
First, install uv. There are [many ways](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/#cargo) to install uv. I prefer to use one of these methods:
```bash
# Standalone installer 
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

# pipx
pipx install uv

# brew
brew install uv
```

## Install a specifiv version of uv
```bash
# install 0.7.6
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/0.7.6/install.sh | sh
```

## Advanced settings for linux servers
If you're working on linux servers, you may have do adjust some settings due to the limited amount of disk space available in the home directory.

Add the following to your `.bashrc`
```bash
export UV_PYTHON_INSTALL_DIR=my_python_install_dir
```
See additional settings for `uv` in the [docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/environment/#uv_python_install_dir).

By default, `uv` will also utilize your `~/.cache` directory. So I recommend creating a symlink to a directory that's not space-restricted.
```bash
ln -s my_unrestricted_dir/.cache ~/.cache
```
> ! If you run into `invalid peer certificate: UnknownIssuer solution` issues, run `export SSL_CERT_FILE=/etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt` in console then try again. ([source](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/1819))

# Python Management
uv replaces `pyenv`

You don't have to explicitly install python versions, since uv will download any missing python versions for you. But sometimes, it's good to be explicit.
```bash
# Install one or more python versions
uv python install 3.11 3.12

# View python installations
uv python list
```
Python binaries managed by uv lives in a specific directory. You can control where Python interpreters are installed using the `UV_PYTHON_INSTALL_DIR` environment variable. See other fine-grained control you have in the [docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/environment/#uv_python).

# Environment management
uv replaces `virtualenv`

```bash
# Explicitly set up an environment.
uv venv <path/myenv>

# Then activate the environment
source <path/myenv>/bin/activate
```

If you don't specify `<path/myenv>`, a virtual environment will be created in `./.venv`

You can specify which python versions you want to use:
```bash
# specify python 3.11 as the interpreter for your virtual environment
uv venv <path/myenv> --python 3.11
```

Why use uv for environment management? Primarily because it can also act as a Python version manager. It quickly downloads python interpreters if they aren't found on your system. I've compared uv with other common environment managers [here]({% post_url 2024-10-26-uv-virtual-env-tools %}).

## Important parameters
* `--python <version>` -- uses the specified python version
* `--seed` -- uv's virtual environments don't have `pip`, `setuptools` or `wheels` by default. The `--seed` option makes them available.

See the complete list of parameters [here](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/cli/#uv-venv).

# Package Installation
uv replaces `pip`

uv is much faster than pip and poetry. Can we use it to install a Poetry-managed project? Absolutely, yes!

In my workflow, I generate `requirement.txt` files because it doesn't make sense to include poetry in production. This is done automatically with [poetry-auto-export](https://github.com/Ddedalus/poetry-auto-export). With poetry-auto-export installed, new requirement files are generated every time `poetry.lock` file is updated.

Since uv is a drop-in replacement for pip, we can call
```bash
# install your dependencies
uv pip install -r requirements.txt

# install the current project
uv pip install . --no-deps
```

If you don't have poetry-auto-export, you can manually export the requirement files (or [write a script](https://mil.ad/blog/2024/uv-poetry-install.html) that does it for you).

In situations where you have to install packages over and over again, uv can significantly speed up your workflow. Such as...
* Running tests with [nox/tox]( {% post_url 2024-11-09-pytest-nox-uv %} ). In these situations, packages are installed in fresh environments, which are destroyed after the test finishes.
* During CI workflows -- see [Using uv in Github Actions](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/github/). Use uv to install both Python and your requirements!

Update: May 2025

If your projects have been configured for Poetry versions 2.x and higher and your dependencies are specified in the [project] table of your `pyproject.toml`, then you can directly call  `uv sync` to install your dependencies.

# System-wide tool management
uv replaces `pipx`

`pipx` install tools like Poetry and Nox in isolated envionments to ensure their dependencies are not in conflict with other system-level tools' dependencies. uv has its own tool management system. To install a tool in an isolated environment, run:

```sh
uv tool install <package>
```

The tools will be installed in the `UV_TOOL_DIR`, which by default is  `~/.local/share/uv/tools`.

Like `pipx`, uv will also add any installed tools onto your PATH, making it available to other programs on your system.

you can upgrade and uninstall tools via
```sh
uv tool upgrade <package>
uv tool uninstall <package>
```

However, uv's strength comes from being able to run these tools without explicitly installing them.
```sh
# directly run a package; uv installs it if unavailable. The tool will be uninstalled after the command is completed.
uv tool run <package>

# or use the shorthand
uvx <package>
```

It is up to you to decide which is more appropriate -- installing the tool, or simply executing the tool.

## Tools with python dependencies
Here's an interesting scenario -- your system has python 3.7 installed (`python --version` returns 3.7). You want to install Poetry verion 2.x, which requires python 3.10. What do you do? In this scenario, we can install the desired Poetry version via:

```sh
uv tool install poetry --python 3.10
```

uv implicitly installs python 3.10 in the background, creates a virtual environment with python 3.10, then installs Poetry using that environment.

`poetry --version` should now return `2.1.3`

See the [Tools documentation](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/tools/) for more details.

# Quirks and Common Issues

## Package Installation with `uv sync`
It's important to know some details about specific steps that happen when you run `uv sync`:
1. uv looks for a `pyproject.toml` in your working directory
2. uv creates a virtual environment in your working directory called `.venv`, if one doesn't already exist. This environment will use the python version specified in your `pyproject.toml` file.
3. uv creates `uv.lock` file, if one doesn't already exist.
4. If `uv.lock` exists, uv will install packages specified in the lock file WITHOUT ANY PACKAGE UPGRADES. This helps keeps all developers using the same dependency and subdependency versions.
5. `uv` installs packages into the `.venv` directory in your working directory.

### How do I upgrade my subdependencies?
```sh
uv sync -U
```

### I want to use a different virtual environment, one that's already active.
```sh
uv sync --active
```

## Migrating from a different package manager
### From Poetry
```sh
uvx migrate-to-uv
```
See the [handbook](https://pydevtools.com/handbook/how-to/how-to-migrate-from-poetry-to-uv/) if you run into any issues

### From requirements.txt
You can add dependencies to your `pyproject.toml` file with
```sh
uv add -r requirements.txt
```
See the [handbook](https://pydevtools.com/handbook/how-to/migrate-requirements.txt/) for a detailed guide

# Further reading
* [using uv with nox]({% post_url 2024-11-09-pytest-nox-uv %})
* [poetry install with uv](https://mil.ad/blog/2024/uv-poetry-install.html)
* [Python Dev Tooling Handhook] https://pydevtools.com/handbook/ -- In-depth handbook on python package managers
